Remarks, and then we will open to questions. Thank you.
Thank you.
Morena koutou ko Shirley McLeod toku ingoa. Good morning, everyone.
My name is Shirley McLeod, and I am
an REA board member attending as the delegate of Denise Bates,
the chair of the Real Estate Authority board.
I'm joined by REA's Chief Executive, Belinda Moffat.
REA is a Crown agent and has a dual role as the conduct regulator of
the real estate profession and as a consumer protection agency
responsible for providing information to consumers on the real estate
transaction process.
We oversee the integrity of the real estate professionals that operate in a
critical part of our economy.
And the 2024-25 financial year for REA was
notable in the following ways.
The real estate market remained challenging.
Listings increased, but prices remained subdued,
and economic headwinds impacted parties' expectations and attitudes.
Despite market conditions, licensee numbers remained stable, with over
15,600 active licenses in the year and just over
2,000 new licenses issued.
We received the highest ever number of complaints, 487,
a 35% increase from the previous year.
And we determined the highest ever number of complaints,
467, a 65% increase from the previous year.
We managed this increase in volume and also made good progress towards our
complaints determination timeliness targets, utilizing the
registrar's triage powers and focusing on more concerning conduct
issues.
Overall conduct of the sector was good, with only 9% of licensees
who were the subject of a complaint outcome facing conduct findings
against them.
We maintained consumer and public confidence in REA as a regulator.
Our research reported that 81% of the public think that the sector is
well-regulated, and 91% of consumers have confidence that
the real estate sector is professional.
Our consumer website, settled.govt.nz, and
consumer resources continue to be highly valued by consumers.
Licensee confidence in REA remained high, with our survey
finding 94% of licensees found our compliance
guidance useful and 78% consider the sector
is well-regulated.
We developed guidance for the sector on the use of AI in real estate
and dealing with conflicts of interest.
Satisfaction in our continuing professional development, CPD
program, increased to 76%.
The judicial review against a mandatory CPD topic was dismissed by the
High Court.
We progressed a critical technology upgrade program to strengthen our
systems and increase efficiency.
Importantly, this upgrade provides a suitable platform for us to explore
AI opportunities.
We do not receive Crown funding, and we delivered our increased
work and our ICT budget project within budget.
We maintained strong systems and controls demonstrated by our
three very good audit grades. We reduced emissions,
attrition, and our gender pay gap.
We supported the Ministry of Justice to progress amendments to our act with
a bill now before Parliament that will increase our regulatory efficiency and
reduce regulatory burden. We hope this bill will progress through to the second
reading very soon.
Our future focus is on five key aspects.
Number one, ongoing increases in the volume and complexity of complaints
and the ever-changing regulatory environment is putting pressure on our resources.
We need to grow to keep up with demand.
We are reviewing our costs to re-baseline the funding required to
deliver our core services, and we will assess whether an increase to the
operational levy paid by licensees is required.
We have drawn on our cash holding reserves to fund our ICT program
and to fund additional resources over the last two years.
In line with our sustainable funding approach, we need to keep our reserves at
a prudent level given the risk of fluctuation in
levy revenue and no Crown funding.
Levies were last reviewed in 2017 and were reduced at
that time. We have not increased the levy since our establishment in
2009.
Number two, supporting the progress of the Regulatory Systems
Amendment Bill, which will increase our regulatory effectiveness and reduce
regulatory burden on the sector. Number three,
completing our ICT improvement program to replace aging infrastructure and
progress our AI opportunities.
Four, continuing our work to engage across the system, raise awareness
of REA and our services, and ensure we meet the needs of all New Zealanders.
And five, working with licensees through our stakeholder groups.
It's critical to addressing
conduct concerns and ensuring professionalism and integrity in a
sector that has an important role to play in our economy, and in the lives of New
Zealanders. Thank you. Belinda and I are happy to address any
questions the committee may have.
Thank you. And we go to Dr. Vanessa.
Oh, thank you.
So the question that I have is around your
complaints that remain unresolved.
Just what is the longest duration a complaint has gone
unresolved?
We have had some complaints that have taken two to three years to get through the
receipt by REA, and then completion by the tribunal.
So with our complaints, as you know, it's quite a complex and prescribed system
under the act. We receive the complaint, registrar reviews it,
triages it, and that's me or my delegate.
And then we make a decision if it goes to a CAC.
The CAC will then determine it. And if they've determined that it should go to
the tribunal, then it will go to the tribunal.
And if a finding of misconduct is made or a finding of unsatisfactory
conduct is made, there may then also be a penalties hearing.
So some of those cases have taken a couple of, we call them outlier
cases, which may have taken two to three years.
We're working really hard to bring those down.
We don't oversee or control the tribunal process.
But we are pleased to see that the complaints that are within our
remit, we're now at about 78% of our cases are being dealt with
within one year. And that's our goal.
It's quite a lot of hard work from the team.
But there are a couple of those outlier cases.
Thank you.
Supplementary.
Go to, oh, supplementary.
Yeah. Just following on. Thank you, Dr. Weene.
SPE 2.6 and 2.7
kind of reinforce the story that I think Vanessa was asking about.
To me, it seems that you haven't achieved the
determination under three months and the determination under one year
in both of those by quite some distance,
got to say. So under three months is 32%, about
65%.
And within one year is 79 as against 90.
So are these the wrong measures?
I appreciate your question. Because with all respect to the board,
the board said, "Let's be ambitious.
Let's do the best we can for the parties," because we know that a complaint
takes a toll on the people involved, whether you're a licensee or complainant.
So we're really striving to reach those high targets.
These numbers are the result of us doing two things.
We've done some, you can call it pivoting.
We've done some changes to our process, and we're making sure we're adapting to new
processes with some different arrangements of our teams.
But also, we are just dealing with this really significant increase
of the complaint volumes. And that is impacting it.
The complaints take time for a number of reasons.
We do have delays and parties coming back to us.
And they can also take time because they're more complex now.
We're seeing multi-parties, multi issues.
We're also seeing complaints that are written by AI.
And so that takes a lot of time for us to work with the complainant to then say,
"Can you bring us the evidence?" Because we can't progress a
beautifully written complaint if there is no evidence to support it.
So-
Supplementary.
Yeah,
understand what you've said.
But also in terms of levies and how your revenue is gained.
Aside from that, you are a legitimate part of government, which is why you're
here.
Government itself is thinking about outcome measures and going through that
process. So some of the things that you've just said might be very
interesting if you were to re-look at your performance measurement
process and start to give us some of that content and that nuance around
why these things are not being achieved or why the level is so low
in this particular reason, 30%.
Yeah.
In our annual report, and I think it is around page 52 to 58,
we've provided some of that context.
We've also tried to work with keeping a succinct annual report.
But we'd be very happy to provide a supplemental response to any questions to
provide some more context, if that would be useful, and then that would be
available to you.
Yes. Because outcome measuring means you don't rely just on the number.
All right. Okay. We go to Honorable Duncan Webb.
Oh, thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Look, just before I ask some more questions about the complaints.
Ms. McLeod,
were you a board member for the period under review?
I was a future director for some of that time.
You're, that's an observer on-
Yes
... wasn't it?
That's correct.
So when was your formal appointment to the board?
I was appointed in December last year.
Okay. Thank you.
I'm looking at your annual report.
And on page 38, there's a slightly unusual measure.
And I'm just keen to understand
why you've got that measure, which is percentage of
licensees subject to formal complaint found to have breached conduct rules
decreases. Right?
Because I'm aware that the formal complaint is after a process.
And it gets triaged. And then it can get kind
of resolved elsewhere. And I'm just concerned that there
might be a perverse incentive there
to resolve complaints informally
so that you meet your
targets of not making adverse findings.
It's kind of an odd
target to not want to make adverse findings against real estate
agents, right?
Would you like to respond to that?
Yeah. It's a great question because I
agree that when you have measures about complaints, you have to be so careful about
how they can be interpreted. Is it seen as a driver for the regulator
to say, "Let's not make any findings," then we look great.
But that's not our intention. We're really committed to making sure that we do
identify misconduct, and that we do hold those licensees to
account.But it isn't. But because we operate in what's called the Braithwaite
triangle, where our other role is to educate and support
licensees to meet the standards, we look at this to see, is our education
being effective? Are we seeing a reduction in the types of misconduct
findings about the issues that we've educated the sector on?
So this is really holding us to account as to, is our education
being effective? Is the engagement we're doing with licensees about the issues
being effective as well?
Well, the better measure there would be percentage of real estate agents subject to
discipline, wouldn't it? Which I know you measure as well.
I guess a related question is,
what percentage of
complaint contacts, those initial contacts,
go to formal complaint processes, and is that trending up
or down?
What percentage of complaint contacts go to formal complaint processes?
Well, this means the formal complaint.
Yeah.
So you triage, right? You say, it
is a complaint. It meets that formal requirement.
Yes.
And then you can say, "Well, look, why don't we talk to the real estate agent?" You
have a triage process where you can
see if you can get an informal resolution.
And I guess my question is,
is the triage process
moving more complaints off of the track or
less complaints off of the track?
Can I answer the question in two parts?
In this year, one of the things we noticed the most was we got this very,
another, it was a second year of significant increases.
There were a lot of low-level complaints.
Consumers were just not happy, and it was about communication.
There's a dent in my carpet because the furniture's been removed.
I didn't receive a disclosure when we were then told, "Actually, no, the disclosure
was made." So there was a lot of consumers just not happy.
They weren't using the complaint resolution process of the agency.
They were coming direct to us. So we did increase the number of cases that were
closed because we also had another increase in what were
concerning cases. In our annual report, we've put in
here the number of cases that were resolved through the early resolution-
What page?
... and that's on page 21.
Sure.
Yeah. So we
said we received 487, and 341 were
resolved through early resolution processes.
Now, some of those is also where a consumer chooses to withdraw.
It's where there may have been a resolution achieved between the parties.
Or it may be where we have determined that it is not sufficiently serious to
justify a regulatory intervention.
There may be a concern-
My question about trend as well. It's about the trend.
Are more being informally resolved or less?
More are being informally resolved and more are being received.
So what we can offer to do is bring back a percentage for you.
Okay.
Of the proportion.
That's the real question.
Yeah.
Proportion. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Yeah. And Kushla Tangemanu.
Okay. Mōrena kia koutou. You've acknowledged your decrease in
gender pay gap.
Is the end game to close it? If so, by when, and
how will you manage that process?
We would love to see a gender pay gap closed.
We continue to work really hard with that.
One of the challenges with the gender pay gap when you're a small entity is one
shift can have quite a significant impact.
At the moment, we are seeing it coming down again because we have
seen an increase in the number of males that
have applied for and been appointed to some of our roles that are in the
lower bands, and that is having an impact.
So we see quite a shift when you're small, and I think
Stats NZ sometimes says that's why not all agencies will publish
because it can shift so quickly. But we are very committed to closing our gender
pay gap.
It's about the bands. It's not about the roles.
We have-
The differences in the-
We work really hard to keep equity across our roles.
But when we're looking at the overall calculation, we are looking from
our lower paid to our highest paid.
So when our team is doing that analysis, they're looking both
vertically and horizontally.
Is it consistent in the bands?
Yes it is. And of course, there is some variation because if there
is somebody who has
more experience,
and whose performance has been
strong, then
some of the remuneration is adjusted according to performance and experience and
capability.
Like merit-
Absolutely. Merit-based.
I have a quick question further to Honorable Duncan Webb's questions, the response
that he gave about some low-level complaints.
So are these people communicated back?
Because we sometimes hear people saying that nothing happened
after they
made a complaint. So the kind of complaints you mentioned low level, like there is
a dent in the carpet after furniture is moved kind of thing.
Are these people communicated back?
Sorry, I didn't quite hear the last bit.
So the response you gave to the complaints process that you said there are a number
of low level complaints that you receive.
You
gave the example that people say there is a dent in the carpet because they
saw the dent after the furniture was removed.
So what happens to those kind of complaints?
Do you communicate to these people, those who make that complaint?
Because what we hear sometimes is that people say, "Oh, we
did make a complaint, but we didn't hear anything." So are those people in that
kind of group where the complaints were very low level?
What is being done to make sure that people know how that complaint
was?
We-
Yes. Can we-
So
our complaints team engage directly with the
complainants and to seek more information about
their complaint, and they communicate regularly around the progress
of that complaint and how it has been put through an outcome
process or how it's been determined.
Can I stop? Oh, you go.
Oh, I'm sorry. And yeah, so we acknowledge all complaints, and it is usually within
one to three days. There is then an assessment of, is it a
complaint that we can receive? If it's not, if it's out of jurisdiction, the party
is informed. And then we prioritize, and we do triage at
that point as to, are they going to be fast-tracked through to a
CAC if it's
clearly serious. And if not, then it will be put through to
our complaints assessment resolution and referral team.
And then it is a case of having the capacity to allocate the cases.
And so some cases do have to wait until they're
picked up by the facilitator to carry on the work.
We do work hard to keep people informed of where they are in the queue.
We've currently had a conversation with our board about what we can do to continue
to enhance that, and this may be where technology will assist us now that we've
upgraded our system. And then we do make
sure that parties are clearly informed if their case is not going to be
progressed. They do receive a letter, and they're given the opportunity to
appeal to the tribunal to have that decision reviewed.
Very quickly, so you said the serious complaints are taken further.
So what's the test for seriousness?
It depends. We've got a, we have a-
Because it could be subjective, right?
For me, it could be serious for me, but if you, it's objective or
subjective for you, it may not be serious enough because you're seeing this wide
range of complaints where you think, "Oh, these are the top 10, and these are more
serious ones, and these ones are not."
We sometimes receive a complaint where we're given fairly clear,
credible evidence of the concern that's been raised.
And if that is the case and we don't need a facilitator to undertake
more inquiry, those cases can be fast-tracked.
And if it is a serious matter, for example, if it was to relate
to serious misconduct, such as
inappropriate behavior in the course of the real estate
agent's work, then those cases where we've got clear evidence, they can
be fast-tracked. A case that might need more inquiry at that inquiry
stage, then they will go through to a facilitator to do that
initial inquiry.
No, I understand you talk about evidence.
But I'm just asking about how do you decide if a complaint is serious.
They may not have provided the evidence, but if it looks like you, they haven't,
that doesn't mean that it should be a closed case, right?
Yeah.
Maybe people don't know what kind of evidence needs to be provided.
So I just want to know, how do you decide how serious is that complaint?
Serious is-
Does that-
Look, interesting. So we look at the seriousness of the conduct.
So is it an egregious failure to, let's
say, disclose a leaky home when there is clearly a building report that
says this home was leaky. There is no evidence that that has been
provided. So that seriousness of conduct.
We'll look at the extent of harm. Was it, what is the consequence
for the
complainant of this conduct?
And we will
look at any other factors such as public interest, which may
relate to, this is a particularly important part of the
regulatory system that needs to be addressed quickly.
Because if it is being undertaken by others, we need to ensure that the message is
clear as to what is and is not acceptable. So there will be a range.
It's an objective, subjective test because we do have our team-
Excuse me
... evaluating the information.
Okay
And progressing it. But a recommendation is made to the delegate
holder, who then makes the decision as to whether it goes through or not.
Okay.
A supplementary.
A supplementary, Honorable Duncan.
Just on the complaints. You've talked about how you communicate with complainants,
and I'm assuming the affected agent as well.
A concerning figure in your report is on page 54, which says
that
in the parties to a complainant who agree that complaints
process is independent, fair, and transparent has fallen
every year for the past three year, four years.
Which is really concerning
because
I would hope, in fact, you've got now not achieved at
54%, which means that
almost everyone who lost their argument thinks it was a
bad process.
So what are we doing about that?
I mean, 54 is ... And also, do you benchmark across
other complaints bodies, like law societies and accountants?
Sheila.
Yeah. So, yes, we acknowledge that our consumer feedback was not as
high, and it is likely to be influenced by the outcome of the
complaint.
And so we
do work with those complainants to ensure that they are
clear on the process that they're going through at the time, and it's very clear
what information needs to be provided so that we are providing them with
a fair opportunity to provide their side of the complaint
as they go through.
And then-
And I'd say the large
decrease, Mr. Webb, is because, as I said before, we've had a
large increase in complaints. And we tend to
find that the people who respond to the survey are the ones who are disappointed.
We very seldom hear from the ones who are really happy because if they've got what
they've got-
Well, but-
So the survey has a little, has a-
But it's getting worse and worse and worse.
It used to be 75%, which is actually not bad for this kind of
benchmark, right?
Mm-hmm.
How do you compare with Law Society complaint?
I don't have the data for the Law Society, but I'm happy to look into that.
Well, how do you compare against your peers in the complaints
space?
The only thing I can comment is that I did work in a previous regulatory
environment which dealt with complaints, and this was also often a
low-rating result for that entity
because of the way the outcome-
But-
... would skew the performance.
Yeah. Well-
But I will say we are really committed to making sure that we
are explaining our process well to people, that they do understand.
And the two things we have done in the last year, the last two years-There's
increasing information on the website about how the process works, and we've
now done a very simplified complaints process sheet that they can
use and understand what to expect from our process.
And our teams just continue to work extremely hard to deal with cases, and
sometimes dealing with quite challenging behavior from the people we deal
with. It does take quite a-
Is any of this a change in behavior?
This is what you'd expect any good complaints system to do, right?
What are you changing to address this constant decline?
Communication. And to Madam Chair's
point before, that communication to the parties is really important.
We are
constantly reviewing the decisions that we make to
close a complaint to make sure that we're really explaining why, to show
that we are ensuring we're recognizing the person's concern, but also
explaining why we are not taking it any further.
So we are looking at the communication very carefully.
Right. Reuben Davidson.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
In your opening remarks, you talked about artificial intelligence, and you also
mentioned it in, I think, a subsequent answer in the context of complaints being
received that are generated by artificial intelligence.
You talked about
having more policy or framework in place around guidance for
that. Looking in your report on page 33, you talk about
the guidance that you provide people, that you would
encourage people to have policies and you would encourage people to do due
diligence. Which seems quite
light as far as encouraging someone to
look at something or do something or have a policy on something.
Do you think that's adequate, or do you
think that that's something that you'll get stronger on?
I think it's important as the conduct regulator to provide
guidance to the sector around how AI can be used
and where it's important that the human interface is there.
We cannot rely on AI to be 100% accurate.
And at the end of the day, the accountability is with the real estate
professionals to ensure that the information that they put out is
accurate.
And so we've taken that response or that perspective in providing our
guidance to the sector.
So a sup on that then would be, based on the complaints that you're receiving,
are you tracking whether AI is an issue
in those complaints? Are you monitoring that across the volume of complaints you're
receiving?
Yes, we are.
Am I allowed to supplement my Chair?
The guidelines are a lot more prescriptive in terms of saying, we have got a list
of what you should do and what you shouldn't do.
So there's accuracy, security,
making sure that, as you said, accountable for the content that's in there.
And we've said to the agencies, the best thing they can do is make sure they've got
policies and processes. And supervisors should know which
salespeople are using AI, and that they've got checks.
And as for the
use of
the... I'm sorry, I've now missed your question. I apologize.
Just really around with-
Oh, yes. Thank you
... how specifically you're tracking AI use-
We are. No, we are-
... as an issue in complaints.
Yes. We are tracking the
complaints that are made about AI use.
The ones that we're seeing at the moment are things like
use of imagery,
use of the blurbs as to whether they are accurately describing the property.
We are tracking the number we're receiving on those complaints.
And we are also tracking the number of complaints that we're receiving
that we think, and we are confirming with the parties, have been written by AI as
well.
And as well as just blanket tracking how many are coming
through, are you looking at complaints that are upheld or complaints
that are valid versus, to come to Dr.
Webb's point around that increase in people being unhappy, do you
think AI is playing a part in
complaints being upheld or not upheld?
I think it's too early to say. This is a trend that we've really seen over the last
12 months. So certainly will be a focus for
us as we head to the end of this year to do some analysis of that.
As I say, some of these complaints will still be in motion.
They may not have had a final decision just yet.
But it is
something that we will be looking at.
Because what we also want to do is, we don't want a complainant
to miss out on having a complaint determined because they've used AI
rather than just telling us themselves what happened.
Sometimes the summary can
cloud what might have actually happened.
So that's something we're concerned to make sure we find out about.
Which is why our facilitators and our people are so important,
and why we've indicated that we do think that to address the volume of
complaints, we do need to be assessing the human resources that we do have to
keep progressing these complaints, making these critical judgments
on these complaints and analysis.
Then we'll go back to Hon. Duncan Webb.
Look, I hope this is a brief question.
You mentioned in passing the Dixon judicial review.
That was appealed, I understand. And I couldn't see that it had
been resolved. Can you give us an update on that?
Yes. The appeal has been withdrawn.
Okay. That actually answers my question.
That's right. Thank you. A very quick question.
Settled website. I know it's been some years since it was
launched. It seems like, to me, a bit of a
disconnected website from REINZ.
So what kind of traffic do you get on that website? Do you measure that?
Is it really people are utilizing that resource?
Yes. Sorry, and I didn't hear the second part of your question.
The-
So the first part is that to me, it felt it's kind of a
disconnected place for people. Because if I'm looking for something to do with a
real estate, I'll go to your website, right?
So Settled is a completely different website.
So how do you measure that that resource is actually working?
Do you see how many people actually go to that?
Some people may not know that that is the place they have to go to when they're
buying or selling, rather than coming to your website.
Mm.
And finding that information on your website rather than a separate website.
So the REA website points to settled.govt.nz in
the consumer area, and the Settled website points back to REA.
So both people can-
Yeah
... connect in that way. And we do track the visits to both
websites, so we can see the
The movement.
Last year, we had more than
718,000 visits to settle.govt.nz.
That was down slightly from the previous year.
But we maintained consistent number of visits to the
rea.govt.nz website. We have put a lot more
information
around our complaints process on the REA website, so
people
can explore that area, whereas Settle is more around the buying and selling
process.
That's right. Because I'm on your website now, and it's not
prominently showing on your website.
So I think I have to click on some other icons to find that website, right?
That was my question. So, yeah.
Okay.
So we can highlight it further. Its initial launch
was developed to be an independent website. So it was friendly.
It was a little bit like Sorted, to be fair.
It had a bit of a take from that to say it's an independent
website. It's independent to give people information, and it's for the
residential sector. We do also track awareness in
our
consumer surveys, awareness of it.
And it is a real focus for us to really push it, and one of the ways we're pushing
it at the moment is connecting with lawyers,
mortgage advisors, banks, to encourage them to use it and offer it as a
resource to consumers. Because we do find the more the consumer
understands about the process-
Mm
... the better the decision-making is.
Exactly. Yeah. Thank you so much. Looks like there are no more questions.
But
if members will think of any more questions, you might receive some questions in
writing later on.
Very happy to provide that.
Thank you so much for your time, and thank you for answering our questions.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much.
Goodbye. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
Very well coordinated